In the last video, we saw how we can gather information from two different tables by making
use of joins. And so we saw how to do that with raw SQL. And now we're going to see how we can
perform joins using SQLAlchemy. And if you go to your post router, we're going to go to the get
posts path operation. And so we're going to kind of just take this step by step and see how we can
slowly build out this query so that we can actually perform a join. And if you take a look at the
current query, what we can do is just ignore all of the filter stuff first. And so really,
the meat of this query is just db.query, and then you pass the model. And that's going to get
every single post that we have in this table. And then we perform all of these filters to kind of
drill down. So we're going to start off with the same thing. And I'm going to save this new query
as results. Or, or we could just say posts_votes, maybe I will just save it as
results. And so we're going to start off with the same exact query, we'll do a db.query, models,
.post. And we'll remove the .all actually remove the .all. And the reason I don't want to do
the .all is I don't actually want to query the table, I just want to actually see the raw SQL
that's generating. And now we can do a print results. I'm going to bring this up a bit.
And we're going to just send a query to the get all posts. And you can see the raw SQL that it
generated. So it's going to select and then basically select every column and then rename it
accordingly. And then it's just going to get that from the posts table. So it's getting every single
post, that's all. So everything is pretty straightforward at this point. And if we go
back to our PgAdmin, let's actually take a look. Let's take a look at what our SQL query
actually looks like. And so you can see here, there's a whole bunch of things going on.
But the next thing I want to do is I want to actually start to perform the join. So I want to join on
the votes table. So let's take a look at how we can do that. And to perform a join with SQLAlchemy,
I can just say join. And then we have to specify the table we want to join. So this is going to be
the models.vote. And then the second thing is what is going to be our the what is going to be
the column that we perform a join on. So in this case, you can see that we're performing a join on
post ID and votes.post_id. And we're going to do the same thing here, I'm going
to say models.vote.post_id equals equals, and then we'll say models.post
.id, whenever they're equal, we're going to join the table. Now the thing about this join is,
by default with SQLAlchemy, this is going to be a left inner join. And the word inner is going to
be a little bit new for you. And it's because there's two different types of left joins,
you've got left, inner, and you have left, outer. And I don't want to spend too much time kind of
diving into what's the difference, just know that if you ignore the keyword, it's going to by default
be an inner. So what we want is an outer join. However, SQLAlchemy by default, uses
inner joins. So to actually set this as an outer join, we have to pass one more thing,
which is going to be isouter equals true. So this is going to make this a left outer
join. So we've got our join at this point. And what I'm going to do now is save this again.
And let's take a look at our query, or send something. And now we'll take a look at a query,
we can see that, okay, we're going to select everything from our post table,
then we're going to perform a left outer join with votes on the table votes, whenever votes
post ID equals post ID. So we're almost there. The next thing that we have to do is we have to
group by post ID. And then we have to perform the count on votes.post_id.
And so if you can take a guess as to how to do group by we can just do dot group_by,
and then we specify the specific column. So we'll do models.post,
dot ID. And then we have to get the count. So we'll go here. And I'm going to say, well,
first of all, we have to import a function. So what you're going to do is from SQLAlchemy,
import func. And so this is going to give us access to functions like count.
I'm going to say func, dot count.
And then we'll say, models dot vote, dot post_id.
We'll save this. And I'm going to send this and let's take a look at the query once again.
And so we've got SELECT posts, all of the post columns, good, good, good, good.
And then we get to count, right, and it's going to perform the count. That's all right. However,
we're naming it as count one. I don't like that. I want to name this something that I will
understand. So maybe something like votes. So we have to figure out a way to rename this column.
And if you want to rename this column, you just say, dot label, and then the name that you want
to give that column. So we're going to call this votes. And so let's test this out one last time.
And now we can see that the column is called votes. So this is exactly what we want. This is
the exact query that we generated in PgAdmin manually, we're just doing it through SQLAlchemy.
And what we're going to do is, well, let's actually perform the query, we'll do .all
don't need the print anymore. And we're going to actually return results. And let's see what happens.
So now if I send a query, it's giving me a whole bunch of errors. And if we scroll to the top of
the errors, we can see that these are all Pydantic validations. And so it's saying that, hey,
there's no title, there's no content, there's no ID, there's no owner ID, there's no owner,
all of these fields seem to be missing. And why exactly is that? Well, let's take a look at the
response model. So the validation is happening because we use this response model of schemas
.post. And so if we go to schemas, and we find our post object, or post class, you can see that
it expects an ID, created at an owner ID, an owner, and all of that good stuff. And it's saying that
none of these have been set. So it looks like there's something wrong with our query. But just
to make this a little bit simpler, what I'm going to do is I'm actually going to remove the response
model. So I'm going to just comment out that, remove the response models, we're not actually
performing any validation. And we're going to see what this looks like now. So when we retrieve the
data, I want you to take a look at what this looks like. So this right here is one specific post.
And so after our changes, we can see that we've got a property called post. And then within there,
we have ID, published, and so on. And then we've got a property of votes. And I'm actually going
to copy this as an example. I'm just going to create a new file. And I'm just going to say,
we'll just call this example.py, that's fine, it doesn't really matter, we'll delete this in a bit.
So this is what it looks like. And when we go back to our path operation, I'm going to return posts.
And we can actually return the response model just to see what that looks like.
And so now if I do a query, I need to save.
If you take a look at the query, this is what it looks like in a working state before we set up the
joins. And if I go down to my example, where's my example.py file. So this is what Pydantic expects,
expects to get an object with a field of title, content, published ID and so on. However,
after I join, something odd happens, we have a field called post. And that breaks everything
because it doesn't expect the ID and the published and the owner to be under this.
This essentially this dictionary right here. And that's why it's throwing all of these errors.
So how exactly do we fix this? Well, what we're going to do is I'm actually going to go to my
schemas. And I'm actually going to create a new schema. So we'll call this, you can call this
whatever you want. Maybe post vote, or I'm just gonna call this post out. And it's going to be a
post base, it's going to extend post base. And what we're gonna do is we're just going to try to match
this as close as possible. So this is going to represent a post object, and then we're going to
have a field called votes, which is going to be an integer. So here, I can just say, we have
something called post. And don't forget to capitalize it because our query, for some reason,
returns it with a capital P took me a little while to figure that out. I was running into a few issues.
But we can go here and we can say I want to return, I want this to be of type,
and then we'll reference this post. Right, so all of these fields will be under a field name post.
And then we expect something called votes, which is going to be set to an integer.
So let's try this out. And we'll go back to our post.py. And I'm going to call I'm going to
reference post.py. And we're going to return results again. And let's just make sure there's
no errors, it looks like it's good. And let's see what happens now. All right, we got a little bit
of an issue. And it looks like there's a title content, title content, a whole bunch of errors.
And so the title and the content are missing for both. So what did we do wrong here, this should
have fixed our issue. Well, let's try adding this class config ORM. I think that might actually be
what's causing this problem. And now let's try this. That didn't look like it fixed it. Alright,
guys, so I was playing around with it. And then I don't know what exactly fixed it. But all I did
was I had changed this to a lowercase p. And this led to, you know, us seeing this specific issue,
where it says, you know, hey, this post doesn't exist. And then as soon as I recapitalized it,
all of a sudden, it started to work again, it starts to work now. So I'm not really sure why
it broke in the first place. I didn't change any other code. Just looking back at my Path Operation
you can see that I'm now changing my response model to be schemas.post_out.
And then we're performing the same results query and then returning it. For some reason or another,
it's now properly working. I have no idea what changed. I have no idea exactly what changed,
but it's working now. So hopefully you guys don't run into any issues. And hopefully it was just
some kind of issue on my machine. But if you do run into the same issue, just try moving it to a
lowercase, try restarting the application and changing it back. I have no idea why that would
fix it, but it seems to have done something. And so now our results are perfect, we get the post
information, we still fetch the owner, which is fantastic. And then we have the votes and then
just double-check to make sure that all of your votes are all okay. And so it looks like they all
look good. I know that one had two and then the rest should all have zero. So everything's looking
pretty, pretty good. The next thing that we need to do is actually go ahead and add our filters
back in. So let's see if I can still filter on all of these. And so I'm just going to copy this.
And then before I perform the dot all, I'm going to paste that in there.
Whoops, I forgot to copy.
All right, and then let's test this out again. I think things are still working. But let's just
add a few extra query parameters. So I'll say, search equals beaches.
Right, and then it looks like it should only return posts with the word beaches. And then let's
try limit equals to remove this search for now. And that works too. So it looks like we get to
keep all of the same functionality that we had before. So I'm going to just write this as posts,
we're going to comment this out, just for reference. And then we're going to return
posts like we normally do. Then one more time, and it looks like everything is still working
just fine. Perfect.